lights — 3/2/26, 2:42 PM
@Scott during the Iran war debate, mention that the US and Israeli state killed 100+ schoolgirls aged 7-12 and killing Ali Khamenei also took the life of his wife, his child, his young, toddler grandchild 
I hope you emphasize how evil and unjustified it was
Austrian Eleutheria — 3/2/26, 7:12 PM
I agree the death of the innocent child is a tragedy and a crime however I'm not sure that is an unjustified act by the US government (or at least would not be justified by a non criminal RIA doing the same thing) allow me to explain. This is a clear parallel the the Baby armor hypothetical any harm to the child is a crime but if someone kidnaps a baby to use it as armor or uses a baby the have guardianship as armor they become responsible for any harm inflicted to the child as a consequence of legitimate force use against them that happens to harm the child. As for the wife she is also a criminal as she accepted stollen property form her husband including the prophets of the murders he committed.
Austrian Eleutheria — 3/2/26, 7:14 PM
I think his claim was Russians rejected socialism after the fall of the USSR which may be in part true but they still allowed Putin to happen so even if they intended to do so their bad philosophy allowed it to remain.
Austrian Eleutheria — 3/2/26, 7:24 PM
I will grant that archetypical members of group 2 probably exist but frankly if we stopped oppressing them even as many of the people actively pushing for group 2 actions or 'solutions' today would chill the fuck out if they saw the root causes namely the active anti white anti western anti Christian persecutions solved, and even more would be satisfied it the only large minority populations in the us were the obviously ultra integrated individuals and the native pre slave trade ancestry blacks because they are at least not foreign and are culturally integrated even if a distinct sub culture. 

and a large part of the reminder would back a Neo Rhodesia plan long before any kind of oppression or extermination as stupid as all of those are.

In short I think you are punching at shadows painted for you by the same collectivists we both seem to hate and buying their lies.
lights — 3/2/26, 7:29 PM
Since it's criminal then it's unjustified
You don't have the right to murder children
dr.sus — 3/2/26, 7:36 PM
if somebody is shooting people with a wall of babies on them as human shields how are you supposed to stop them without first harming said baby in this hypothetical, unless you just allow them to murder people 
since you can't at all murder the child in this case
lights — 3/2/26, 7:41 PM
Murder simply refers to an intentional, unjustified homicide
If it was indeed justified, then it wouldn't be murder
In this scenario you'd be justified to kill these babies to stop the aggressor in this instant
dr.sus — 3/2/26, 7:42 PM
i would say eliminating a threat to the rights of everyone such as the baby covered mass shooter would be enough of a justified cause to permit the loss of 1 life
lights — 3/2/26, 7:42 PM
If that was the gentle means
dr.sus — 3/2/26, 7:42 PM
yes
lights — 3/2/26, 7:42 PM
The aggressor would be responsible for the death of those children
Since by the principle of causationism (my new legal principle) the aggressor is the proximate causal agent of that entire causal structure 
dr.sus — 3/2/26, 7:43 PM
yes
wait, so if the agressor using children as shields to protect themself is liable to die even in the case of an untimely death for the child would this not justify striking the people leading any state even if there is collateral given they are the largest thief, armed robber and murderers in the world
lights — 3/2/26, 7:44 PM
No
You don't get to nuke an entire country to stop a government agent
Most of these strikes tend to be "retributions" and "responses" than actual self-defense
Once you're engaging in retribution, the standard is much higher
dr.sus — 3/2/26, 7:45 PM
let's say in the use of missiles though not nuclear weapons
where the area of attack and risk of killing civilians is lower
lights — 3/2/26, 7:47 PM
Depends on the context
We saw with the US it was possible to capture a state agent very quickly in Venezuela
And because the state is a monopolist, it has no incentive to determine what is the most efficient and most gentle means to stop an aggression
dr.sus — 3/2/26, 7:48 PM
Let's presuppose you verifiably have a location of this state director and are certain the amount of people around would lead to low relative collateral damage
would this then be justified?
dr.sus — 3/2/26, 7:48 PM
Good point
lights — 3/2/26, 7:53 PM
Still depends on further context. Will people eventually walk away for a clearer line of fire? Is non-lethal restraint possible? What are all possible alternatives and have we assessed them all given all the available resources, facts on the ground, etc?
It has to be that the force is (a) immediately defensive (not retributive) and (b) all other alternatives are more harmful
The problem with analyzing this situation is that (a) we can't do that from the comfort of our homes, we need the localized facts on the ground, as Kinsella points out, there's a point where we can't solve some legal case in our armchair and (b) the state is a monopolist that gets virtually no accountability and we know monopolies have little incentive to innovate and push their cognitive limits to think of better solutions 
lights — 3/2/26, 8:01 PM
One can only speculate that because the state is fundamentally corrupt to its core, it stands to reason that their "responses" are far beyond what's necessary
The third issue, (c), is that a self-defense attack requires stopping an immediate aggression. It's not simply "they committed an aggression already in the past and they likely will again in the future"
The self-defense must be engaging in a present proximate causal structure of aggression
lights — 3/2/26, 8:08 PM
And even though Khamenei engaged in aggression before and likely would have engaged in aggression in the future, you have to ask if in that moment in time he was engaging in aggression that needed defending against. Since he's the head of state, then yes, he's part of a continuous, ongoing structural aggression. 
It has to be an ongoing aggression.
The harder question to answer is if it was the most gentle means to stop his aggression and whether assassination in that form it was in was the most gentle means possible, the state as a monopoly has no incentive to discover this. For these reasons and on this strict standard, almost every single attack against foreign state agents that result in private property damage and civilian deaths isn't actually justified 
dr.sus — 3/2/26, 8:20 PM
Could you claim predictions of further aggression by a nation with a policy of further aggression is not unjustified?
Like a sharia law nation we would assume would later attack the west if they’re jihadist
lights — 3/2/26, 8:38 PM
It wouldn't be self defense merely because someone is a jihadist and "likely" will attack in the future. It has to be where they're actively engaging in a process of attack.
Another problem with killing Khamenei is that everyone knew it wouldn't end the state's aggression, it would just get replaced by some other aggressor
dr.sus — 3/2/26, 8:38 PM
Fair enough
lights — 3/2/26, 8:39 PM
Since the attack wasn't actually terminating an aggression, then that's even more reason to say the collateral damage wasn't justified
It was more like retaliatory, or symbolically sending a message
Neither of which are sufficient reasons
Austrian Eleutheria — 3/3/26, 1:12 AM
The argument is that the child's guardian is the criminal.

dr.sus summed up my position and you agreed with all the core premises with only the critique that we should presume the state exceeded their mandate for defense as they are a criminal monopolist. 
Which is a fair point but it only shows that they are unhilly to be justified in fact not prove that a non criminal could have legally taken the same actions.
Which is fair thank you for the elucidation on the pragmatics.
Austrian Eleutheria — 3/3/26, 1:31 AM
You seem to believe that their can be no valid action claims on other people only property claims. 
I don't see how you reconcile that against criminal justice unless you claim the victim owns the criminals body.
On that theory a criminal not turning themself over for punishment is engaging in ongoing theft I presume you agree that a bounty hunter or repo person is justified in taking defending themself form anyone blocking access to the  property they are lawfully repossessing and to with minimum damage break into any location such property is being held as long as the offender was given an option to turn it over?

If you accept this then why is the standard for retribution higher and what exactly is the higher standard if not the genialness principal but also allow the victim to use their property as they wish (including property gained by being the victim of a crime).
lights — 3/3/26, 9:19 AM
Because (a) punishment is a property right that belongs to the victim, and (b) once you're no longer defending yourself, gentleness principle doesn't apply and you don't get to murder innocent people just to punish someone. Retribution isn't stopping an "ongoing" aggression, it's responding to an aggression that happened already. No, you don't get to "use your property as you wish", just as I can't shoot my gun at random strangers just because I own it. You have the right to exclude others how they want to use it when their use interferes with your use, you don't have the right to use it as such for any purpose.

The wife might be a "criminal" for knowingly accepting stolen funds. But that's a matter of punishment, not defense from ongoing aggression. Accepting stolen funds isn't by itself an ongoing aggression to "defend against". She has already committed the aggression, she isn't in the continuous process of a new aggression. We're talking about defense here of new aggressions, not punishment. Don't conflate the two. Defense is ex ante, punishment is ex post. Having stolen property doesn't entail it's justified to execute you.
ST_Misfit — 3:59 AM
This seems really good, but if retribution is a property right that belongs to the victim and the aggressor kills the victim/—Is restitution no longer owed? Does the ownership of the restitution transfer to next of kin? The victims designated agent? Or society? Is vigilanteeism never justified? Of course the State is not justified in any of its actions, but then again justice applies to actions no? An unjust actor or entity can commit just action, no? Like police.
Austrian Eleutheria — 4:48 AM
I would argue actions contain the mental state and evil actions require certain mental states that can only b had by a person not an animal but you could make a claim that is semantics,
For example Murder is the unjust killing of a Person an anima cant act unjustly only ajustly thus a mere animal cant murder by definition but that also means you cant murder them either.
Austrian Eleutheria — 4:57 AM
unowned property can be homesteaded and undefended but clearly owned property can be placed under guardianship. Who the next of kin is is based on community norms (with arguments about which next of kin are most implied in community void hypotheticals) unless the person explicitly makes someone else their heir lastly vigilantism is valid in ancapistan you are just homesteading the guardianship of the owed restitution making yourself liable to the victim in the place of the criminal but gaining the right to extract from the criminal in their place. That said i is a risky business because the vacuum can forgive the original perp but not you or you may nit extract value sufficient to pay the victim and have to eat the difference as a loss if you tell the perpetrator you release them which implicitly indemnifies them, if however you just apprehend them pending trial that is different that is just preventing them form committing extra crimes via fleeing justice.