I once heard someone argue that self-ownership is invalid because it presupposes a split self (owner and owned) which is impossible and that the better explanation is agency
lights — 10:48 AM
Sounds like Randian nonsense again
They don't understand what Rothbardians mean by self ownership
Because I'm sure they'll accept bodily autonomy
They just don't like to frame it as "ownership"
They don't understand what Rothbardians mean by ownership
Austrian Eleutheria — 10:49 AM
I have herd that exact crazy from a commy trying to sound smart as well.
lights — 10:50 AM
True commies will say that too
But they all tend to accept bodily autonomy
Which means they accept self-ownership
Lurker — 10:52 AM
He was a type of left-egoist
lights — 10:52 AM
They don't understand the conflict avoidance theory of property
They think in terms of labor theory of property
Lurker — 10:52 AM
He made a real strong effort to obfuscate what he believed in 
Austrian Eleutheria — 10:54 AM
Not the tankies who claim Stalin did nothing wrong .
I wouldn't put it past a Maoist either.

also same argument from classical fascists especially because Gintele(sic) literally asserts the primacy of the state over the individual
lights — 10:56 AM
In my mind I was thinking of ancoms but yes not the tankies
Austrian Eleutheria — 10:59 AM
I see why you went there and they would defiantly say that but it is what i hear lots of crypto socialists of all flavors say as well and in my opinion we don't want to conflate the no hope devotes of demoniacs like Marx with the verry confused honest ancoms and Lolberts.
Lurker — 11:05 AM
What defines a crypto socialist would you say?
Austrian Eleutheria — 11:06 AM
I believe I saw you were in the live audience of Zulu and co on the Remnet recently do you disagree with i believe it was Monhop when he said that it could be possible to approximate corporate ownership via contract in ancap law?
Lurker — 11:06 AM
Aren't you partially an objectivist?
lights
Lurker — 11:08 AM
I don't remember the context of the podcast
But I'm with Kinsella that you can have corporate structure in a free society via contracts
lights — 11:11 AM
When I say "Randian" I mean what Rand said. Most of her philosophy I agree with, but I don't think Rand had a precise, rigorous understanding of rights
Lurker — 11:12 AM
I see
lights — 11:19 AM
I think she caricatured the thesis by libertarians. Libertarians aren't arguing that humans are property. They're not arguing humans are objects separate from themselves. They're making a legal principle. They're saying that individuals have the right of exclusive control over their own bodies and are allowed to exclude others from using it. If you want to have a clearer language, I think Kinsella is correct to frame it as "body ownership"
Lurker — 11:19 AM
Yeah I understood it as the exclusive right to your own body
lights — 11:21 AM
I think "self-ownership" is already pretty clear if you're not incredibly autistic about the word "self"
Most libertarians understand what they mean when they say the word
You don't need to get all metaphysical
But if you want to be autistic and conceptually precise, you can say body ownership 
Lurker — 11:24 AM
Yeah its very intuitive but you must watch out for dishonest argumentation
